Add guide on deploying using Docker (#1538)
vaadin/docs: articles/production/docker.adoc

---
title: Docker Deployment
description: Deploy your Vaadin application using Docker
order: 55
---

= Deploying Using Docker

A https://docs.docker.com/get-started/overview/[Docker container] is a standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries, and settings.

> Building a Docker image requires creating a Dockerfile, a text document containing all the commands needed to assemble and run that image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building a Docker image requires creating a [filename]#Dockerfile#, a text document containing all the commands needed to assemble and run that image.
```

== Creating a Dockerfile for New Vaadin Applications

> For a Vaadin application, you can easily generate a Dockerfile by selecting the `Docker` option in https://start.vaadin.com/[Vaadin Start].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a Vaadin application, you can easily generate a [filename]#Dockerfile# by selecting the `Docker` option in https://start.vaadin.com/[Vaadin Start].
```

This makes building and running your container as simple as running the following two commands:

. To build your container (assuming your project name is `myapp`), run
+
`docker build . -t myapp:latest`

. To run your container on localhost.
+
`docker run -p 8080:8080 myapp:latest`

== Adding a Dockerfile to Existing Vaadin Applications

> If your Vaadin project did not come with a Dockerfile previously, you should copy and paste the Dockerfile from a fresh Vaadin Start project into your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your Vaadin project was not generated with a Dockerfile, you can copy and paste the Dockerfile from a fresh Vaadin Start project into your project.
```

> While we will not be teaching you how to create your own Dockerfile, let us quickly inspect the Dockerfile generated by Vaadin Start, to help you with customizing it in your own application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we will not here cover all the commands you can use in a [filename]#Dockerfile#, let us quickly inspect the Dockerfile generated by Vaadin Start to help you customize it in your application.
```

A typical Dockerfile from Vaadin Start should look similar to the content below.

.`Dockerfile`

> [source,dockerfile]

Reviewer: I think having `dockerfile` as a source is not rendering correctly. Maybe it could be `terminal` 🤔 

@jouni where to find the list of acceptable source types?

Author: It looks like `dockerfile` is one of the supported languages. https://github.com/github/linguist/blob/master/lib/linguist/languages.yml

GH confirms that they are using Linguist https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-repository-languages

Reviewer: But the issue is not how the page is rendered in the preview here on GitHub. The problem is how the application that builds the docs' pages renders this class, and how the reader will ultimately see it on vaadin.com/docs. In the preview it currently looks broken: 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/42799254/181496879-6b8e8d3c-b0df-43ad-b092-1fa20766ad00.png)

Reviewer: It seems that `dockerfile` works with asciidoc alright. Thee issue was that there was wrong dash characters used to delimit the source code block. I fixed this in a new commit.

—---

> # Stage that builds the application, a prerequisite for the running stage

Reviewer: Let's remove the comments from the file, and instead use only the callouts (the things we define using `<1>`, `<2>`, etc.). Using both the comments in the file and the callouts is confusing and makes the whole text difficult to read.

# Build the production package, assuming that we validated the version before so no need for running tests again
# <14>
RUN mvn clean package -DskipTests -Pproduction
# Running stage: the part that is used for running the application
# <15>
FROM openjdk:17-jdk-slim
# <16>
COPY --from=build /usr/src/app/target/*.jar /usr/app/app.jar
# <17>
RUN useradd -m myuser
# <18>
USER myuser
# <19>
EXPOSE 8080
# <20>
CMD java -jar /usr/app/app.jar
—---

<1> Use the https://hub.docker.com/_/maven[official Maven image] as the base image. The variant used is the slim version as specified by the `maven:<version>-slim` syntax.
<2> Runs the `curl` command to download the Node.js binary.
<3> Updates apt and installs the Node.js binary downloaded in the previous step.
<4> Adds a new user called `myuser`.
<5> Changes the current working directory using the `WORKDIR` instruction.
<6> Modifies the ownership of the directory `/usr/src/app/` in the container volume.
<7> Switches to the `myuser` unix user.
<8> Copy the `pom.xml` file with the optional `chown` feature.
<9> Runs `maven`.
<10> Coping files.
<11> Coping files.
<12> Coping files.

> <13> Coping files.

Reviewer: Let's combine all of these callouts into one.

= Docker Container

Projects generated by Vaadin Start can https://vaadin.com/docs/latest/guide/start[already have its Dockerfile generated]. This makes building and running your container as simple as running the following two commands:

. To build your container.
+
`docker build . -t myapp:latest`

> . To run your container on localhost.

Author: Hi @tarekoraby, Docker `Desktop` is a simple solution for laptops and `desktops`, but I actually don't use it. Whenever possible, I prefer to install docker engine in Linux VMs instead. 

Do you think I should mention both, only Docker Desktop, or only Docker Engine?

> . To run your container on localhost.

Reviewer: Yes, let's mention both with links.

+
`docker run -p 8080:8080 myapp:latest`

> == Add The Dockerfile Manually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Adding a Dockerfile to Existing Vaadin Applications
```

If your Vaadin project did not come with a Dockerfile previously, you should copy and paste the Dockerfile from a fresh Vaadin Start project into your project.

While we will not be teaching you how to create your own Dockerfile, let us quickly inspect the Dockerfile generated by Vaadin Start, to help you with customizing it in your own application.

A typical Dockerfile from Vaadin Start should look similar to the content below.

.`Dockerfile`
[source,dockerfile]
—---
# Stage that builds the application, a prerequisite for the running stage
# <1>
FROM maven:3-openjdk-17-slim as build
# <2>

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: Yes, I think so. Good catch @knoobie. This should be fixed in Start generated projects too.

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: @dmitrilc please remove this line from the `Dockerfile`. (that is, remove
```
RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -
```
Vaadin will automatically download the appropriate Node version anyways. (new projects from start.vaadin.com now have this line removed).

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to let this here or change it to a comment as alternative way to acquire nodejs. This curl call could be changed to something within the own network for example.

Reasoning: Having build container or maven-plugins downloading stuff from internet is dangerous and close to impossible in restricted environments. Showing the developer that node is needed and can be installed like this without the maven-plugin automation sounds like a good thing.

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: But in which scenarios would Vaadin automatic Node installation fail, whereas using curl would succeed?

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: What would replace curl in restricted environments?

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer 2: I've seen corporate environments where an internal URL was used to download node from a secured server with only specific node versions allowed, e.g. `curl https//my-internal-url./nodejs/custom_setup_14.x `

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: Then I suggest still removing the two lines that install Node:
```
RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -
RUN apt-get update -qq && apt-get install -qq --no-install-recommends nodejs
```
And add a note at the end of the guide (outside the `Dockerfile`) that says something like:

_Creating a production build of the application inside the `Dockerfile` involves an implicit step by which Vaadin automatically downloads and installs a suitable Node.js distribution. In restricted environments with no (or limited) internet access, this automatic Node installation might fail. In such environments, make sure to install Node from a secured server as a separate step inside the `Dockerfile`. For example (and depending on your setup), the first few lines of your `Dockerfile` could look something like the following:_
```
FROM maven:3-openjdk-17-slim as build
curl https//my-internal-url./nodejs/custom_setup_16.x
RUN apt-get update -qq && apt-get install -qq --no-install-recommends nodejs
```

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer 2: I really like that suggestion! :+1:

> RUN curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | bash -

Reviewer: Done! Pushed in a new commit. Thanks for the feedback ❤️
